Surface water floods (SWF) cause a significant proportion of flood-related damage in Switzerland and are frequently triggered by short-duration, high-intensity summer rainfall. However, little is known about flood triggering and impact-relevant precipitation thresholds and surface water floods are not yet integrated into operational warming systems.
We develop a prototype for impact-oriented warnings for SWF for Swiss campgrounds through co-production with stakeholders from a Swiss campground association, based on two rounds of semi-structured interviews with nine campground managers. The first interviews revealed that managers were interested in impact-oriented warnings, i.e., impact-relevant precipitation thresholds, rather than a comprehensive impact-based forecasting and warning pipeline that includes explicit impact information. To address their need, we used a hydraulic model fed by synthetic precipitation of increasing intensity to assess the flood extent and flood water depth on the nine campgrounds. We then intersect the flood information with the location-specific exposure. The resulting SWF impact storylines illustrate the location-specific pluvial flooding for increasing precipitation intensity and they served as basis to choose warning thresholds for the campgrounds jointly with the campground managers that consider local knowledge on site-specific vulnerability. For one campground located at a small stream, more complex flood impact storylines were developed that reflect the compounding effects of stream discharge and local pluvial flooding.
The impact storyline approach supports stakeholder risk communication and preparedness planning, while also enabling the identification of impact-relevant precipitation thresholds from the simulations. These precipitation thresholds could be included in an extended forecast value chain that integrates hazard, exposure, and vulnerability for future local impact-based forecasts and warnings (IBFW). The impact storyline approach could be transferred to other infrastructure systems (e.g., residential buildings, transport networks, and energy networks) by defining system-specific exposure elements and decision-relevant impact metrics. However, transferring such participatory and impact storylines to larger spatial scales remains challenging, in particular, considering the complexity of compounding flood effects.

